Add Gateway deployment arch (#5452)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/deployment/gateway/index.md

that you can use for health and performance monitoring of the OTLP endpoint
collector.

> ## Typical Gateway deployment architecture

Reviewer: What makes that deployment "typical"? I just want to verify that this is not a too strong wording, maybe "exemplary" or "Example of a gateway deployment architecture" or "Example architecture"?

Author: Added some description. Please take a look.

Reviewer: I still struggle with the "typical" since it is very prescriptive while not giving the end user a hint what we are talking about. Reading your updated text (thanks for that!) I rather prefer something like

```suggestion
## Combined deployment of Collectors in gateway and agent mode
```

It's rather long so maybe there is a way to express this shorter, but the intend is clearer that this is a section that talks about combining the modes

> The following diagram shows a typical deployment architecture for a gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows a typical deployment architecture for a gateway deployment.

```

> ![gateway](otel-gateway-arch.svg)

Reviewer: Can you describe in a few words what I see on that diagram?

Author: Added .

> There are a few limitations in running the OTel collector in gateway mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few limitations in running the OpenTelemetry Collector in gateway mode.
```

> - Few receivers need to be unique per host instance. Running multiple instances

Reviewer: > Few receivers need to be unique per host instance. 

I don't understand what that sentence means.

Author: Updated, please take a look.

>   of these receivers will result in Duplicate data. It is recommended not to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  of these receivers will result in duplicate data. It is recommended not to use
```

>   them in the Gateway collector but only for the collector running in Daemonset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  them in the Gateway Collector but only for the Collector running in Daemonset
```

Have we introduced "Daeminset mode" somewhere? This also sounds k8s specific, so we need to call out that this is a k8s specific example somewhere at the top

that you can use for health and performance monitoring of the OTLP endpoint
collector.

## Typical Gateway deployment architecture

> A typical Gateway architecture involves running both Collector in Gateway mode
> and Agent mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often a deployment of multiple OpenTelemetry collectors involves running both Collector as gateways and as [agents](/docs/collector/deployment/agent/).
```

> The following diagram shows a typical deployment architecture for a gateway
> deployment. Here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows an architecture for such a combined deployment:
```

> - We use Agent Collectors (running on each host, similar to Kubernetes
>   daemonsets) to collect telemetry from services running on the host and host
>   telemetry, such as host metrics and scrap logs.
> - We use Gateway Collectors to process OTLP data, such as filtering, sampling,
>   and exporting to backends etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We use the Collectors using the agent deployment pattern (running on each host, similar to Kubernetes
  daemonsets) to collect telemetry from services running on the host and host
  telemetry, such as host metrics and scrap logs.
- We use Collectors using the gateway deployment pattern to process data, such as filtering, sampling,
  and exporting to backends etc.
```

![gateway](otel-gateway-arch.svg)

There are a few limitations in running the OpenTelemetry Collector in gateway
mode.

- There are few receivers in OpenTelemetry Collector that need to be unique per
  host instance. Running multiple instances of these receivers will result in
  duplicate data. It is recommended not to use them in the Gateway Collector but
  only for the collector running in Agent mode. Examples include, but are not
  limited to:

  - [`hostmetricsreceiver`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver),
    may result in duplicate host metrics.
  - [`filelogreceiver`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/filelogreceiver),
    may result in duplicate logs.

- Using a
  [`resourcedetection`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor)
  processor in gateway mode is not recommended. This processor is used to detect
  the resources of the host where the Collector is running. Use

>   `resourcedetection` processor in the pipeline of Agent collector deployment.

Reviewer: I would like to rephrase this section here, because it is key for a user to understand why they would need a combination of agents and gateways. This is the reason why this effort is needed, that needs to be made clearer. A suggestion:

```
This combined deployment pattern is necessary, when you use components in your Collector that either need to be unique per host or that consume information that is only available on the same host as the application is running:

- Receivers like the [`hostmetricsreceiver`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver) or [`filelogreceiver`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/filelogreceiver) need to be unique per host instance. Running multiple instances of these receivers will result in duplicated data.

- Processors like the [`resourcedetectionprocessor`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor) are used to add information about the host the collector and the application are running on. Running them within a Collector on a remote machine will result in incorrect data.
```
